# Abstract

Jonathan Reeve and Hans Walter Gaber, *Open Editions Online*

Our projects, the Open Critical Editions of *Dubliners*, *A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man*, and *Ulysses*, known collectively as Open Editions, aggregate knowledge about these novels in ways that are community-based, machine-readable, and future-proof. Toward this end, we employ two well-tested technologies: semantic markup with TEI XML (Text Encoding Initiative eXtensible Markup Language), and distributed version control using Git.

TEI XML enables the encoding of semantic information about a text: we label textual features with their literary functions. For each utterance, we mark up the speaker's name. For interior monologue, we mark up from whom the stream of consciousness emanates. For each place mentioned, we give precise latitude and longitude. We also mark up text in foreign languages; mentioned places, people, artistic works, and notable objects; repeated themes or leitmotifs; and genres (songs, poems, prayers). We create internal links between analogous passages, external links to critical discussions of a given passage, and bibliographic links to the targets of allusion, parody, or other intertextual correspondences. Most importantly, the list of features that we mark up is continually expanding. Thus, the editions are never strictly complete, in the traditional sense, but always evolving. Through mark-up templates for knowledge aggregation and, in some cases, creation---that is: for semantic enrichment---, we hope to provide structured data that might be read in computational text analyses, and to provide as well an open, robust base for the creation of future editions.

Git, the distributed version control system on which Open Editions editions are built has long been in widespread use in software development, but is rarely used for textual editing. When applied to textual editing workflows, Git allows for a radical decentering of the power structure of a traditional editorial committee, following similar power structures of open-source software projects. This allows any interested party to contribute markup or code to the project. While we, the project coordinators, must approve any incoming contribution to our version, parallel versions may be created in seconds, each reflecting their maintainers' editorial and annotational choices, opinions, and knowledge. At the time of writing, our editions have seen a total of around twenty contributors, representing the work of librarians, professors of literature, graduate students, and undergraduates, and this number continues to grow. Additionally, since Git requires detailed descriptions of each change or set of changes, this provides us with a mechanism by which to document every change we make, to revert changes as necessary, and to group sets of changes in "branches."

The core texts of the editions are based on XML renderings of Hans Walter Gabler's reading editions of *Ulysses* (1986, from the full edition of 1984/86), *Dubliners* (1993) and *Portrait* (1993) in their respective texts and line-fall identical through all issues of these editions. This means that the Open Editions in community use provide a stable basis also for engaging, too, with issues of textual criticism, editing, and annotation in the dynamics of the born-digital environment.
