**Open Editions Online**

Scholarly editing is commonly the work of specialists. For readers and
users, engaging with editions in print has in the past been essentially
receptive. This need no longer be so for editions in the digital medium.
Open Editions Online offers James Joyce's *Dubliners*, *A Portrait of
the Artist as a Young Man* and *Ulysses* for interactive use in
progressive dialog. The foundational texts are the reading texts for
these works from the scholarly editions prepared by Hans Walter Gabler
and his co-editors in 1993 (*Dubliners*, *Portrait*) and 1984/86
(*Ulysses*), respectively.

As initially encountered in Open Editions Online, the texts are
pre-furnished with a 'nest-egg' grouping of marked-up categories of
information: *Dialog attribution; Text genre; Language; Line numbers.*
The categories can be clicked on or off. The *line numbers* provide
elementary orientation for the digital intra-text navigation, as well as
for moving between screen and book: line numbers are identical
throughout in the respective digital and book publications. *Text genre*
and *Language* help to gauge the stylistic width of the narrative. The
*dialog attribution* serves to identify characters narrated as speaking
and to research the intensity of their participation in the narrated
events, as well as, for instance, what they are severally and together
talking about.

The *dialog attribution* group models the potentially most richly
expandable form of mark-up for information and annotation. It opens the
gateway to manifold semantic enrichment of an Open Edition Online text
instantiation. Being open-source, the site may be individually
downloaded to a user's personal computer environment. This includes
open-source access, too, to the mark-up tool-kit. Competently deployed,
the tools will allow the user to define fresh mark-up categories of her
personal choice so as to render them addressable for further exploration
and research. Through such dynamically progressive dialog, the edition
text will become successively enlarged into an annotated edition.
Conceivably, individual users who start by each building their own
enriched editions might eventually group together and pool their digital
paths to understanding and insight.
